well the Pentagon says the US is
preparing to take significant action
against militias which have hit American
targets for days the Biden
Administration has been hinting at
strikes in retaliation for a drone
attack in remote on a remote US military
base in Northwestern Jordan known as
Tower
22 three American troops were killed in
the incident on Sunday defense secretary
Lloyd Austin said it's take it's time to
take further action against militias
backed by that have attacked US forces
on land and at Sea Serv MERS he also
said that while wishing to avoid the
conflict escalating the US will not
hesitate to act the president will not
tolerate attacks on American troops and
neither will
I our teammates were killed by radical
militias backed by Iran and operating
inside Syria and Iraq so this is a
dangerous moment in the Middle East we
will continue to work to avoid a wider
conflict in a region but we will take
all necessary actions to defend the
United States our interest and our
people and we will
respond when we
choose where we choose and how we
choose let's look at this with Bradley
Bowman who's senior director of the
center on Military and political power
in Washington DC welcome to DW uh what
are you hearing about the when where and
how thank you for the opportunity to
join you you know the Biden
Administration has uh been deliberately
vague on uh the when and the how and I
think that's appropriate right because
Washington does not want to give its
targets a lot of advanced notice because
that would endanger US forces and change
the results but at the same time uh
there's been a lot of signaling here the
administration seems to be looking for
some sort of goldilock strategy if you
will where it's not too hard and not too
soft the premise of this Administration
for months now has has been that
American restraint is the best path
forward the problem with that approach
is that we've seen more than 165 attacks
on US forces in Iraq Syria and now
Jordan and many republicans in Congress
think that's what brought us to this
horrible point where we've seen three
the lives of three service members taken
members who will not be returning to
their families so uh there's many in
Washington pushing for strong attacks
but this is more art than science and
they're trying to find that sweet SWAT
between establishing reestablishing
bolstering deterrence but not starting a
larger War okay so no or when or how
what about
where yeah you know I I think it's
almost certain that we'll see
significant attacks this is my informed
conjecture in Syria uh maybe in Iraq
there's some disincentive to conduct
these attacks in Iraq because when we
cut when the US conducts these attacks
it creates pressure in Baghdad to try to
evict us forces which would be a gift to
Iran and a gift to the Islamic State so
I think we'll probably see attacks over
multiple days certainly in Syria uh some
IR Rock and perhaps elsewhere and many
in Washington are saying that if you
just focus on the terror proxies the
puppets if you will and avoid the puppet
master in Iran then it plays right into
the Islamic Republic of Iran's decades
long strategy where they Advance their
interest through others and to displace
the counter punches and consequences
onto others usually Arabs you've talked
about this this Goldilocks strategy uh
not so uh hard enough to uh to deter a
further attacks but not so hard uh as to
uh provoke more attacks escalation does
seem inevitable as you look at the
events of the last few weeks between um
clashes between the the IDF and
Hezbollah along the Israel Jordan border
the US and Britain striking houthi
Targets in Yemen and now uh this talk of
uh of American America hitting targets
perhaps in uh Syria perhaps in Iraq the
the escalation seems
inevitable it it uh yes but it is
interesting that everyone sounds the
alarm about escalation when America
responds I mean imagine for people
watching home imagine your home was hit
165 times and and and and the homeowner
repeatedly Said Knock It Off please stop
please stop and they keep attacking your
home 165 times when that homeowner
responds I wouldn't call that escalation
I would call that Common Sense
self-defense to knock off the attacks I
I think the real danger right now for
Washington is a too weak of a response
rather than too strong sorry right okay
so the the idea though that that
Washington whether with or without its
allies goes ahead and
Andes and attempts this goldilux
response you don't think it carries a
strong risk of the whole thing going up
in
Flames I think it's very likely as a
student of history and the student of
this region and someone who's studied
defense and National Security issues for
a long time that if the US does the
strong response which I believe
restoring deterrence requires that you
may have a short-term escalation of
course of course uh we saw that in
January 2020 in Iraq when after the uh
kasum solomani killing we saw two US
bases in Iraq hit with ballistic
missiles from Iran an active war against
Iraq and had more than a hundred US
service members with traumatic brain
injury so I hope and expect that
pentagon is taking steps now to protect
us forces for the inevitable response
which will come but that doesn't mean
the United States can sit on our hands
because we can't leave our adversaries
with the impression that they can kill
our soldiers and face no consequences
that's unacceptable Bradley Bowman from
the central military and political power
thank
you thank you
sir I'm joined Now by Alex vatanka
director of the Iran program at the
Middle East Institute in Washington DC
welcome to the program Alex now we've
just heard those uh strong words from
the defense secretary there what more
can you tell us about the possible
targets and
timing good interview what you told me I
think uh timing remains to be seen
clearly uh the United States needs to
act uh the killing of three Soldiers by
this Iraq based militant group really
demands action and response uh it will
be significant and in terms of targets
and your question look it really depends
I think overall uh if you look at the
axis of resistance that Iran has been
spearheading in recent decades it spans
from hisbah in Lebanon and to some
extent we could call the houthis in
Yemen on the other side of the Middle
East also a proxy of sorts um of the
Islamic Republic I don't think these
organizations will be targeted I think
the US will be very specifically going
after those militant groups that have
been carrying uh about 167 attacks
against US forces in Iraq and Syria so I
think it'll be very targeted I don't
think it will be a sort of major uh you
know attack against some of the bigger
players in the axis of resistance like
hisbah it will be minor groups that the
US will go after so you don't think this
could cause some kind of escalation
military tensions particularly after the
US has said it's not seeking war with
Iran if you mean escalation in the sense
of a regional War I don't think that is
likely to happen for one simple reason
the United States as white has has made
it very clear is not interested in
Regional War I don't think the Israelis
are interested in a regional War at this
point and certainly the Iranians are not
interested in Regional War so I think
most likely what would happen is clearly
you don't want a regional War if you're
Washington but clearly you want to make
sure you uh re uh you know reinforce the
idea of deterrence um you have thousands
and thousands of American troops across
the Middle East for them to become uh
sort of sitting targets for militant
groups is unacceptable to any American
president and certainly this American
president who just enter election cycle
so for politic reasons in the United
States and because the reality is on the
ground something needed to be done but
nothing as large as inviting a regional
War which is just said I really don't
don't think is of the interest of any
other the larger players you mentioned
the political angle there how how big
part does that have to
play oh it's important I mean uh for any
American president it it would be
important when American soldiers are
killed uh overseas and for this
particular uh American president as he's
facing a reelection he needed to do
something but at the same time I think
President Biden knows that the American
public opinion is not interested in a
large war in the Middle East that's the
last thing American public opinion wants
but when you start killing Americans it
requires a response and I think the
Iranian side clearly understood that if
you noticed the last few days Tran is
trying to distance itself from these
proxies and the proxy group responsible
for the attack in Jordan has itself not
suspended attacks in in the United
States so I think that tells us quite a
bit about where each uh is coming from
and where we're likely to go in the near
future okay so so Iran as a whole you
would say they don't have a a major um
overall objective in in backing these
groups well clearly Iran does have a
long-term objective and that goes back
to the Iranian Revolution of 1979 there
are two key pillars to that one is to
basically bring the end of the state of
Israel the other one is to push the
United States out of the Middle East but
that's a long-term strategy of the
Iranian regime if you listen to Iranian
supreme leader Ali he's not asking for
war and these objectiv is to be met next
week or next month or even next year
he's saying that's a long-term strategy
now that's a whole different issue and
how the West deals with that requires um
you know a strategy on the part of the
West which frankly doesn't exist right
now but in the short term as I said I
doubt very much anybody's interest in
Regional war that would essentially put
everybody at a loss okay Alex vatanka
director of the Iran program at the
Middle East Institute in Washington DC
thank you very much for your insights
you